+++
author = "James DeVries"
title = "Using stow to Backup Dotfiles"
date = "2024-03-03"
description = "How to get started with stow and back it up with git."
tags = [
    "git", "stow"
]
+++
## Backing up dotfiles with stow

How to start using GNU Stow to make backups of your configuration files (dotfiles)
and use git to version them and backup on a remote repo.

## Setting up stow

Follow your package manager's instructions for installing `stow` if you don't
have it installed already.

1. Create a folder in your home directory. I'm naming mine `.dotfiles` and all
examples here will use that naming. You can pick whatever you want. Change to
that directory to continue the steps.
    ```sh
    mkdir ~/.dotfiles
    cd ~/.dotfiles
    ```
1. Make folders in the `.dotfiles` directory for each app/tool you want to
backup. For example: zsh, nvim, git...
    ```sh
    mkdir git
    mkdir zsh
    ```
1. Move the config file from your home directory to the application folder you
created. Example for git:
    ```sh
    mv ~/.gitconfig git
    ```
1. Run the stow command to re-link the gitconfig file back to your home directory
    ```sh
    stow git
    ```
1. Verify the link:
    ```sh
    > ls -l ~/.gitconfig
    lrwxr-xr-x  1 james  staff  24 Mar  3 17:00 /Users/james/.gitconfig -> .dotfiles/git/.gitconfig
    ```
1. Repeat the above 3 steps for all the items you want to stow

## Setting up the git repo

Set up source control for your dotfiles to keep track of changes made and
optionally make remote backups on git server.

I added this snippet to my `.zshrc` to print a message when I sign in
that lets me know if there are pending changes to any of the files I'm
tracking in the `.dotfiles` directory. (Tested with zsh)

```sh
if [[ `git -C ~/.dotfiles/ status --porcelain` ]]; then
  echo "There's changes in .dotfiles!"
fi
```







